Fair Park station

Fair Park station is a DART Light Rail station located in Fair Park in Dallas, Texas. It serves the Green Line.[1]  The station opened on September 14, 2009 as part of the first phase of the line, which stretched from Deep Ellum to MLK Jr.[2]

Layout and Design
The station is located on the eastern side of Parry Avenue and consists of two side platforms with two passenger shelters on each side. The westernmost gate of Fair Park is directly adjacent to the station. Northbound buses board from the rail station, while southbound buses board from a bus shelter across the street. Unlike many DART stations, Fair Park station does not have a parking lot.

The architecture of the station's shelters is notably distinct from all other DART rail stations, boasting an Art Deco aesthetic with limestone columns and granite benches. Fair Park contains the largest collection of Art Deco exhibition buildings in the world, built for the 1936 Texas Centennial Exposition, and the station was designed to blend into the surrounding architecture while revitalizing the historic entrance to Fair Park.[3]

Service
The station is serviced by the Green Line, which typically runs trains every 20 minutes. During important events such as the State Fair of Texas, additional Green Line trains run between Victory and Lawnview, decreasing the headways to 10-minute intervals.[4] The station can also be serviced by special-event Red Line trains, which connect Fair Park to the northern segment of the Red Line; this is typically reserved for the day of the Red River Showdown, which is the busiest day of the fair.[5]

The eastern entrance to DART's Central Rail Operating Facility is connected to the rail network between Fair Park station and MLK Jr. station. Northbound trains leaving the rail yard start at Fair Park, and southbound trains leaving the rail network make their final stop at Fair Park. This service pattern is utilized by both Green Line trains and Orange Line trains.

References
External links


This tram-, streetcar-, or light rail-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.
This Texas train station-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.