Forest Products Laboratory



The Forest Products Laboratory (FPL) is the national research laboratory of the United States Forest Service, which is part of USDA. Since its opening in 1910, the FPL has provided scientific research on wood, wood products and their commercial uses in partnership with academia, industry, tribal, state, local and other government agencies.[1]  The laboratory is headquartered in Madison, Wisconsin.  The focus of the Forest Products Laboratory is to promote healthy forests and forest-based economies through the efficient, sustainable use of the Nation's wood resources.[2]

History

By the late 1800s, awareness was growing that timber resources were finite and careful use could extend them. In 1887 B.E. Fernow, chief of the Division of Forestry in the Department of Agriculture reported:  
 The properties upon which the use of wood, its technology, are based, should be well known to the forest manager if he wishes to produce a crop of given quality useful for definite purposes. Our ignorance of this direction has been most fruitful in fostering a wasteful use of our natural forests, and the same ignorance misleads even the forest planter of today in choosing the timber he plants and the locality to which he adapts it. How the Black Walnut has been sacrificed for fence material, how the valuable Chestnut Oak has rotted in the forests unused, how the Hemlock has been despised and passed by when it might have been successfully used to lengthen the duration of White Pine supplies, how timbers are now used in unnecessarily large sizes and applied to uses for which they are not adapted, while other timbers are neglected for uses for which they are adapted --- all these unfortunate misapplications are or have been due to lack of knowledge of the technological properties of our timbers.[3]
Between 1890 and 1910 research into timber management and reforestation was scattered across various U.S. universities. Research into the mechanical properties of various woods was done at Purdue and universities in Washington, California, Oregon and Colorado. Yale hosted studies on preservation and kiln drying. An experimental pulp mill was at Boston, along with studies of wood chemistry and preservation.[3]

The Forest Products Laboratory was conceived of in 1907 by McGarvey Cline, chief of the U.S. Forest Service Office of Wood Utilization. Cline saw the need for a centralized research facility in order to improve coordination among regional research centers.  Along with Forest Service Chief Gifford Pinchot, Cline selected the University of Wisconsin campus as the site for this new laboratory because Madison had good access to rail lines, was close to timber resources, and the UW had a good reputation for scientific research.[3]

In 1910 the Forest Products building at 1509 University Avenue (now Materials Science and Engineering Building) was completed, housing 45 researchers in eight divisions: Timber Physics, Timber Testing, Pulp and Paper, Wood Preservation, Wood Chemistry, Wood Distillation, Wood Engineering, and Pathology.[3] Raphael Zon's advocacy of research led to the organization of the first Federal Forest Experiment Stations and the Forest Products Laboratory under the Branch of Research, which was formed in 1915.[4][5]

The lab's work grew and in 1919 there was already a proposal for a new facility. It was finally funded in 1928. The UW provided 10 acres (4.0 ha) on the west end of campus and the Forest Service built the new lab in 1931 and 1932. The building was designed by Holabird and Root of Chicago in International Style, reflected in the absence of ornament, the ribbon windows, and the corner windows. The building's footprint is U-shaped, with the central block six stories tall. Inside, the lobby floor is terrazzo and the doors and wood trim are stained and varnished American Walnut. The second floor is trimmed in white and red oak, the third in chestnut, the fourth in clear birch, and the fifth in redgum. Low annexes were added to the main lab building in 1935 and in the 1950s, and various detached outbuildings have been added over the years, like the 1934 Fire Test Building.[3]

Research at the FPL has improved quality of life for nearly every American by facilitating breakthroughs in housing, packaging, recycling, and conservation of forest resources.[6] Specifically, researchers at the FPL developed particle board, glued laminated wood, the laminated arch, pulp paper processes, and fiberboard boxes, and wood crates.[7] The FPL has also made numerous important contributions to the country during its history, including crucial research for the armed forces during times of war.[6]

Overview
The mission of the Forest Products Laboratory is to identify and conduct innovative wood and fiber utilization research that contributes to conservation and productivity of the forest resource, thereby sustaining forests, the economy, and quality of life. The FPL is organized into seven primary Research Work Units. These units utilize the testing resources of several laboratories and informational repositories located within numerous FPL campus facilities. Five primary Areas of Focus are the center of all FPL research. Collaboration on this research takes place with various other Federal agencies; state, local, and tribal governments; private industry and academic institutions.

Research Emphasis Areas
Research Work Units
Laboratory Units
Resources & Technical Assistance
Research & Testing Facilities
Centennial Research Facility
The most advanced large-scale addition to the FPL in over 70 years is the new Centennial Research Facility (CRF), a 87,000-square-foot (8,100 m2) multi-use laboratory. This facility was built to meet qualifications for Silver certification by the Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) rating system developed by the U.S. Green Building Council. As such, the CRF was designed and built using strategies to improve performance across the most important efficiency metrics: energy savings, water usage, greenhouse gas emissions reduction, improved indoor environmental quality, and stewardship of resources including sensitivity to their impacts. CRF researchers in engineering mechanics can test the strength of full-scale structures while durability researchers put wood products to the test in a rather punishing weather simulation chamber. Modern preservation testing equipment will replace the older vessels previously used, while an efficient and manufacturing-friendly floor plan will help advance research in wood- and bio-based composites.[12]

Research Demonstration House and Carriage House
FPL has constructed two full-scale structures, the Research Demonstration House and Carriage House, for research and educational activities.  Both of these structures allow researchers to conduct housing-related studies in a real-world setting, which can significantly extend knowledge obtained in a laboratory environment. These structures are a result of collaboration through the Advanced Housing Research Center,[13] established by FPL in 2000, which includes a wide range of partners from both the public and privates sectors working to improve housing technologies.

Fire Test Lab
The fire testing facility at FPL is key to developing safe, durable building products.  The current facility is equipped to perform standardized tests for flame retardancy and fire resistance.  Plans for construction of a new fire test facility are underway, and current capabilities will be enhanced by enabling simulation of actual fire scenarios on a larger scale. The new facility will allow researchers to better address wildland fire threats to structures and development of performance-based building codes.

Pulp & Paper Plant
FPL's fiber processing pilot plant is equipped to replicate industrial pulping and papermaking processes on a pilot scale.  With capabilities in chip production, pulping, paper and fiberboard production, and even recycling, researchers can test new methods and evaluate their effectiveness on equipment similar to that used by commercial manufacturers.

Nanocellulose Pilot Plant
In August, 2012, the FPL unveiled a $1.7 million production facility for renewable, forest-based nanomaterials. This facility is the first of its kind in the United States and one that positions the laboratory as the country's leading producer of nanocellulose materials. Nanocellulose is simply wood fiber broken down to the nanoscale. For perspective, a nanometer is roughly one-millionth the thickness of an American dime. Materials at this minute scale have unique properties; nanocellulose-based materials can be stronger than Kevlar fiber and provide high strength properties with low weight. Applications for nanocellulose materials, for example, include use in lightweight armor and ballistic glass. Companies in the automotive, aerospace, electronics, consumer products, and medical device industries also see high potential for these innovative materials in a wide variety of applications.

The facility will support an emerging market for wood-derived renewable nanomaterials, helping to spur forest-based job growth and contribute an estimated $600 billion to the American economy by 2020.
The U.S. and other nations will see numerous benefits from the commercialization of wood-derived cellulosic nanomaterials.  Development and commercialization of new lightweight, high-performance wood-derived products can help reduce fossil fuel consumption and greenhouse gas emissions while increasing the potential for rural manufacturing opportunities, including the creation of many new high-paying jobs. The Forest Product Lab's new facility will aid in the commercialization of these materials by providing researchers and early adopters of the technology with working quantities of forest-based nanomaterials.

References
External links
 Media related to Forest Products Laboratory at Wikimedia Commons

43°04′28.8″N 89°25′38.9″W﻿ / ﻿43.074667°N 89.427472°W﻿ / 43.074667; -89.427472


