Fort Worth Masonic Temple

The Fort Worth Masonic Temple is a Masonic Temple located at 1100 Henderson Street, Fort Worth, Texas. Designed by Wiley G. Clarkson, the Neoclassical/early PWA Art Moderne structure was completed in 1931 and has largely remained unchanged.[2] The building was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 2017 as Masonic Temple.[1]

History
Masonic bodies have existed within the city of Fort Worth since April 1854 with the founding of Lodge #148. William Stevenson Cooke purchased a four-block parcel of land in 1923 as a central meeting location for the city's various Masonic groups as part of an effort to consolidate all downtown lodges and orders under one roof. In 1926, a committee was formed to pool resources for a building.[3]

The original plans for Fort Worth's Masonic Temple were drafted by the architectural firm of Wiley G. Clarkson & Co. The Masonic Building Association called for an “imposing, one million dollar building of monumental character” with a stone exterior in classic Greek design. The stock market crash of 1929 forced the construction committee to accept a downsized plan, with an adjusted budget of $625,000. Groundbreaking ceremonies commenced on November 14, 1930, and construction was completed on September 16, 1931.[3] The building exhibits an amalgamation Neo-classical styling with Art moderne influences and features upper-story Ionic columns and monel alloy bas-relief doors.[4] It features two grand staircases at the main entrance which leads to a terrace. The main doors depict the three Ancient Grand Masters of Masonic legend, King Solomon, Hiram, King of Tyre, and Hiram Abif.[5]

The Temple was dedicated to WS Cooke's memory upon his passing in 1951. During the Cold War the building was designated a Civil Defense Fallout Shelter (a marking still adorns the southern entrance of the temple).[6] The building became a recorded Texas historical landmark in 1984.[7] In 2017 the Masonic Temple was added to the National Register of Historic Places.

Historical Artifacts
Several historical artifacts are housed within the temple. Of note is a bell cast in London, England in 1782, one of the oldest historical artifacts in Fort Worth.[8] The bell was brought out to Texas by Lawrence Steele and used as a dinner bell for the Hotel Steele. Later it was used as a tolling bell for the First Ward School, the city's earliest elementary school building.[9]

Users
The Fort Worth Masonic Temple is home to four Craft Lodges and several Masonic appendant bodies & youth organizations in Tarrant County:

The facility is also available for rent to the general public.[23]

See also
References
External links