George Washington Middle School (Virginia)

George Washington Middle School in Alexandria, Virginia, is located at 1005 Mount Vernon Avenue, part of Alexandria City Public Schools. Named after the nation's first president, it originally opened in 1935 as a high school; it consolidated the city's two previous schools, Alexandria and George Mason.[1] The Tulloch Memorial Gym was built in 1952. As many as nine classes at a time are now held each period in the gym or the classrooms connected to it. In 1971, the city's school district moved to a 6-2-2-2 configuration, and reassigned its three high schools from four-year to two-year campuses. The newest, T.C. Williams, took all of the city's juniors and seniors, while Francis C. Hammond and George Washington split the freshmen and sophomores.[2] Both became junior high schools in 1979, with grades 7–9, and middle schools in 1993, with grades 6–8.[3]

Beginning in the 2009–2010 school year, both were split into several smaller schools with George Washington split into the two schools, George Washington 1 and George Washington 2 and Francis C. Hammond split into Francis C. Hammond 1, 2, and 3.[4] Former superintendent Morton Sherman believes that smaller schools will provide, "...personalization, engagement,
and customization for higher levels of achievement for all students."[5] However, this change was later revoked, and George Washington and Francis Hammond are both united schools now. Both middle schools also began to follow the International Baccalaureate Middle Years Programme curriculum. This was also changed, and now only Jefferson-Houston School follows the International Baccalaureate Middle Years Programme curriculum. 

Demographics
AFL preseason game
In 1965, GWHS hosted a pre-season American Football League game on August 7, between the New York Jets and Houston Oilers.[6] It was a charity benefit sponsored by Kena Temple, the local Shriners organization, and was wrapped into the city's annual "Alexandria Days" summer festival,[7]—and was known for being the professional debut of Joe Namath.[6][8]

Notable alumni
References
External links