List of public schools in Louisville, Kentucky


There are more than 145 public schools in Louisville, Kentucky, servicing nearly 100,000 students in kindergarten through 12th grade (K–12) education. The primary public education provider is Jefferson County Public Schools (JCPS).

Schools are typically categorized as elementary, middle or high schools, though some exceptions exist. J. Graham Brown School offers education for all grades in one school. Moore Traditional School is a combined middle and high school (formerly two separate schools). The Anchorage School is the sole school of AISD, educating for grades K-8.

Elementary schools
Public elementary schools provide education through fifth grade (approx. age 11, depending on the student). Some elementary schools offer pre-kindergarten programs.

John J. Audubon, painter and bird enthusiast.

Home of Safety City (a miniaturized city with 'go-cart' automobiles designed to teach students safe habits).

The school was originally constructed by German immigrants. It was purchased by the Louisville Board of Education in 1868. The name (formerly Shelby Elementary) and mission of the school were changed in 2008.

Located on College Drive in Jeffersontown, KY on the site of the original Jeffersontown Elementary.

Middle schools
Middle schools provide education for grades 6–8, typically ages 11–14.

1977[20]

High schools
High school begins at grade 9 (approx. age 14), running through grade 12 (approx. age 18).

The school has a structured learning environment for students with disciplinary problems and those placed by court order.

The school offers a structured learning environment for students with disciplinary issues.

A fire, in the 1940s, heavily damaged the gym and cafeteria. This fire plus the opening of Eastern High School in 1950 caused the high school to be closed. The original building (located on same lot as present-day Tully Elementary) was used as an elementary school until it was demolished in 1975. The school was re-established at its present location in 1966 following petition by residents of Jeffersontown.

Other/combined
The name was selected by the students, parents, and faculty of the school.  It was changed in 2009.  The school was formed as a result of No Child Left Behind. 

See also
References