List of historic properties in Avondale, Arizona



This is a list, which includes a photographic gallery, of some of the remaining structures and monuments, of historic significance in Avondale, a city in Maricopa County, Arizona, United States, adjacent to Phoenix, Arizona.Farming was the main industry in Avondale in the late 1890s. Avondale was incorporated in 1946.

Brief history
The surveying marker of the Gila and Salt River Meridan is located on Monument Hill. Ever since 1851, this has been the center point used by the state to measure the land in Arizona. The federal government recognized this point for measuring the boundary between the United States and Mexico after the Mexican–American War ended. The first survey conducted in 1867, involved the first 36 miles of Arizona. Up until 1874, this was the epicenter of all surveying in Arizona for property deeds. It was listed in the National Register of Historic Places on October 15, 2002, reference #02001137. Monument Hill is located at 115th Ave. and Baseline Road in Avondale, Az.[1][2]

In 1860, William G. Moore a.k.a. "Billy" moved to Arizona. He established a settlement in 1880, by the Agua Fria River (Cold Water River) area. He purchased some land there and built a stage station. The station served the travelers on their way from Tucson to northern Arizona and California. Moore also established a saloon and a general store. He named the area where his establishments were located  "Coldwater, Arizona" and he served as the post master of "Coldwater" from 1901 till 1905.[3]

Around 1905, the United States Postal service moved their office from Coldwater to a site near the Avondale Ranch. The post office was renamed Avondale Post Office. The area then became officially known as Avondale instead of Coldwater. In December 1946, the City of Avondale was incorporated.[3]

The Three Rivers Historical Society
The mission of the Three Rivers Historical Society is to preserve the history of the cities of Avondale, Goodyear, Litchfield Park and Tolleson.[4]

Properties pictured
The following is a brief description and images of the historic properties that are pictured.[5]

Historic properties and structures in Avondale
The historic Goodyear Farms Historic Cemetery established in 1917, where many of the farm workers who perished during the 1918 Spanish Flu pandemic are buried in unmarked graves.

Further reading
See also
References