Patrick Henry Building

The Patrick Henry Building  is a historic building located in Richmond, Virginia. Formerly designated simply as the Old State Library or the Virginia State Library and Archives and Virginia Supreme Court, it was renovated, then rededicated and renamed for the Founding Father and former Virginia Governor Patrick Henry on June 13, 2005.[2]

Description
The limestone-sheathed steel-core building was built in a modernist style for government buildings sometimes called Art Deco or Stripped Classicism.  Three teams of architects designed the building: Baskerville & Son; Carneal, Johnston and Wright; and consulting architects Githens & Keally.[3]

The minimal exterior ornamentation was intended to direct attention to the nearby Virginia State Capitol.[4] The two main entrances refer to its original two functions, as do the quotations from famous Virginians inscribed on the four sides (all-caps removed; periods for original colons):

The extensive 2003-2005 renovation retained the original entrances and many inside Art Deco details (such as wood paneling, marble features and copper light fixtures), but modernized the plumbing, HVAC and electrical systems (removing hazardous materials). It also replaced the library stacks which had served as supportive core for the steel-frame building with modern core amenities.[5] Some elements of the building's expansion in 1970 were also removed.

History
Constructed by the Works Progress Administration during the New Deal, the building served as the home of the Supreme Court of Virginia (formerly known as the Supreme Court of Appeals per the inscription above the Broad Street entrance) until it moved to the renovated former Federal Reserve Building in 1978. The entrance facing the capitol refers to the Virginia State Library, now known as the Library of Virginia, which moved to a new building at Ninth and Broad Streets (as well as an offsite storage annex) in 1996. The Supreme Court and Library had moved from the Virginia State Library-Oliver Hill Building in 1939.  This building's former reading rooms also temporarily housed Virginia General Assembly sessions in 2006 and 2007, during renovations to the capitol.[6]

The building was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 2005, under its former name.[1][7] As of 2020[update], the building housed the Governor's office as well as other government offices.[8]

Historical marker
In 2017, the Virginia Department of Historic Resources dedicated a state historical marker outside the building. It tells the story of Richard and Mildred Loving, the plaintiffs in the 1967 Supreme Court case Loving v. Virginia which overturned Virginia's law against interracial marriage. The building was chosen as the site of the marker because it housed the Supreme Court of Appeals, where the Lovings' case was heard.[9]

The marker reads:

References